Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
By the end of World War II, Captain Edward Kozlowski had flown 88 missions over the combat territory of the European theater.
His planes had been shot down on more than a few occasions, each time escaping capture by uncommon means.
His life's path took him from his boyhood farm home in Wisconsin.
through his military service as a pathfinder, navigator, to Houston, NASA, where he designed and installed the heat shields used on the Apollo missions.
But perhaps his most rewarding mission was that to win the heart of Yolanda Frisch Army Nurse Corps.
It too was no easy challenge.
Yolanda Frisch of the 100th Evacuation Hospital always set up near the front lines following Patton's army through France, Belgium, Holland, and Germany.
a triage nurse, a surgical nurse.
Both former Texas A&M employees now retired in Bryan.
They are indeed testament to the bravery and determination of all those men and women who served for freedom.
Please meet Captain and Captain Ed and Yolanda Kozlowski.
What an honor it is to have you both here.
I want to fast forward to when you all met.
In 1947, you all got married, but talk about how you all met, where you all met.
It was during the height of the war in the European theater.
Yolanda, what do you remember about it?
Well, I remember going to a dance and meeting my husband-to-be.
And after we got through with the dance and on our way home, he asked me to write him.
And I said I would write him just like he was my brother, which I did.
What do you remember?
How did the party come to be?
It was after D-Day, right?
It was after D-Day.
We had been flying for four days almost consecutively.
As we'd fly the mission, come back and get briefed and maybe catch three, four hours of sleep and take off again.
But on the fourth day, the CO says, well,
Today we're going to have a party.
I kept saying, what, you can't have a party without women?
And they said, well, we kind of took care of that.
What it was was that they had a contingent of nurses.
coming down from Blackpool, England, down to Southampton.
And they were going to spend the night somewhere near our airfield.
So we sent some trucks over to pick them up and bring them over.
Well, the trucks got lost a little bit in the dark.
And by the time the trucks came back, a lot of us had imbibed a little in the...
at the bar, so we were pretty wide-eyed, and I'm not too sure that the nurses were ready to stop over.
But after that evening, you all talked, you got to know each other.
You didn't really see each other.
No.
How did you communicate after that?
Letters.
Female.
Well, letters, email.
Right, right.
And because actually you were sort of one step ahead of him sort of through the rest of the war.
He'd be one spot, you'd just been there, you'd move to another spot.
Is that right?
That's right.
Whenever he came to the airfield, he'd ask where we were and we had just moved away from there.
And then he'd come to another airfield and we had moved.
So he kept chasing me.
And he finally got you.
Yolanda was the Army Nurse Corps.
Of course, you were Army Air Corps.
I want to talk about your career.
You grew up in a farm in Wisconsin, and it was something that happened on that farm, I believe you told me, that first got you hooked on flying.
What happened?
Well, we had a plane come over, or a man come over to ask my father if he could land his plane on our pasture.
And my father said, yeah.
He said, well, I'll give you a ride in the airplane.
This was an old bi-wing, open-pit,
open cockpit plane and he sat in the front and the passenger sat in the back and so he gave me a ride and right then and there I said goodbye farm I'm ready to fly.
You were ready to go.
You were commissioned December 1st 1941.
Of course six days later the world changed obviously on December 7th with the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
I think you were scheduled for a leave but that leave got cancelled.
Talk about
What happened to you after Pearl Harbor?
Well, after Pearl Harbor, you mean... Right.
You changed your direction a little bit and went off to Europe, right?
That's right.
When my orders were changed, I was to go home for 10 days and they...
Instead I wound up in Maxton, North Carolina with some B-17s.
And they filled up the plane with 27 navigators.
And we all flew to England.
And we landed near Oxford University at a little field there.
And for six weeks we were taught by the RAF
getting familiar with their radar sets and their radar navigation that they had covered Europe with so that we could have a more pinpoint
location of where we were at any time we were traveling, which worked for a while, but then the Germans got real wise and began to jam it pretty badly.
So once we got over Europe, about 200 miles inside the borders, we were pretty much on our own.
The radar did not help us too much.
When you were transported with those 27 other Pathfinder navigators, I believe you said that it was Christmas Eve, and you all sang Silent Night on the way over the North Atlantic, is that right?
Well, yeah, we left on Christmas Eve, and around midnight somebody said, well, we're over the ocean, and he started to sing Silent Night, and by the time he was through, I think everybody on the plane had a...
a tear or two in his eye.
Absolutely.
You were young kids, didn't know where you were headed or what you were in for.
You didn't fly as a Pathfinder Navigator.
You didn't fly just one aircraft.
You were experienced in B-17s, B-24s, other aircraft.
That's right.
I was transferred from one group to the other, whichever was going to fly a particular mission.
So I didn't really stay at one air base for very long.
and kind of transferred from one group of planes to another, B-17s, B-24s, and B-25s.
I only flew one mission in the B-26, and that was in France.
First time you were shot down.
I know that's an interesting story about where you hid.
Talk a little bit about your hiding place and being shot down the first time.
Well, we had bombed the...
wall bearing factories at Schweinfurt.
And we're coming back when we met a lot of fighters and messerschmitts that gave us a lot of trouble.
And we had to crash land right on the border between Holland and Germany.
And as we landed, we didn't really land, we belly landed.
got out of the plane, and three of us ran towards the farmhouse, towards the farm barn, and the other three ran in some other direction.
We had a few wounded people we left in the plane.
And as we were running towards it, the farmer came running out and said, no, no, no, no, no.
And he showed us the big pile of manure, and so we wondered what he was talking about.
We ran over there and opened the door and there was a little hut sort of thing and there were three RAF people there.
And so we slid in behind him and he closed the door.
And it wasn't three, four minutes later that we could hear the Germans running around there looking for us on the thing.
The three others that ran in an opposite direction from us were captured.
So this was a cellar that was pretty much camouflaged by manure.
That's right.
Right.
And so the Germans, they weren't interested in getting near that, obviously.
And that evidently saved you.
And you were able to escape from that, though.
Then a little, the next morning, we stayed there overnight, and the next, towards morning of the night, a truck came along and we all got into the, into a truck that carried fish.
And of course we were all down, got into the truck and covered up.
And he took us to a place on the north, on the coastline of,
of Holland, which I don't even know where it was, but it was a Catholic church that we got off, and we went down into the basement of the church.
We stayed there the rest of the day, and then at night, we moved out towards the sea, got on a fish boat, and went out to the, somewhere out into the North Sea.
Oh, after about four or five hours or longer, it seemed like days, but we heard the boat stop and they told us to come up, get out of the fish hole, which was pretty ripe by that time.
Yes, I bet so.
And then we were up on deck and pretty soon we saw a submarine come up right next to us.
It was a British submarine that came in.
We were taken off the boat, fish boat, got into the submarine.
And the British filled the boat with fish and he left and went back to Holland and we were taken back to England.
As a Pathfinder and Navigator, you generally, I guess, flew in the lead plane of most formations, and that made you a pretty easy target for the Germans.
They figured if they could get that lead plane, they were going to mess things up quite a bit.
That's right.
And they could identify us pretty quickly because we had a big, gray tub underneath the plane that actually carried the radar equipment, I think.
Talk about your mission specifically at D-Day and what your job was on June the 6th, 1944.
Well, on D-Day, actually, we were told we were going to fly early.
And General Eisenhower was at our field, and he talked to the paratroopers and said, good luck.
And we all got into the plane at about 1 o'clock in the morning.
and flew over to Cherbourg Peninsula and dropped the, and they, it was the 82nd Airborne that we dropped into, on the Cherbourg Peninsula.
And then we flew back, and as soon as we landed, we were coupled with some
gliders that carried a jeep and six men or six men and a howitzer.
And we'd pull them over and they'd fly, well after a certain area, wherever the drop zone was,
They cut off and landed hopefully well.
A lot of them did not.
And so we turned around and came back.
And this went on for about two and a half days.
And then we began to fly in ammunition.
And these were dropped by parapacks right on the ground, right from the plane itself.
And these were C-47s.
It wasn't a bomber.
It was C-47s.
And that's like the old DC-3 that we know now.
And flew medical supplies and everything.
And after 10 days,
began to land at cow pastures.
Actually the engineers would line the field with steel mats and we'd land on there
take the wounded, and come back to England.
This went on for about, well, 15 days.
And then we were, after I met Yolanda, we were then ordered to go to Italy to get ready for the invasion of southern France.
And we were stationed at Civitavecchia, which was about 40 miles north of Rome.
area there, that landing was a milk run compared to what we had in D-Day.
I'll bet it was.
The paratroopers landed, little or no opposition.
Yolanda, you joined the Army North Corps in 1943.
You decided you didn't want to be just a private nurse.
You wanted to get involved, but somebody was determined that you weren't going to go overseas.
They said you had bad eyesight and flat feet, but you told them that differently, and sure enough, you served overseas.
Talk about how that all came about.
Well, when I joined the Army, they told me that I would only be assigned to the United States.
And I told the recruiter, I don't think so.
But I said, we'll see.
And I was assigned to Fletcher General Hospital in Cambridge, Ohio.
And fortunately, at that time being, we were in blue uniforms and they were changing the khaki.
And the Army said they would furnish me with all the things that I needed.
But unfortunately, they didn't get to where I was.
And I ran around in civilian clothes, which annoyed my chief nurse, no end.
And as a result of that, she assigned me to the 100th evacuation hospital overseas.
So I got overseas, which I wanted to be anyway.
Talk about the 100th evacuation hospital, exactly what was its mission.
You were near the front lines, I know, involved in D-Day and later.
No, we landed.
Our unit landed in France in July, just before they bombed St.
Louis.
I understand.
And we were assembled in a field next to Reims, France.
And that's where we got our first casualties.
And these were ongoing things.
When our hospital moved, we moved one half at a time so that we could keep going constantly.
We would take one half of the hospital and move it forward to wherever we were assigned to and then the other half would come when they were already in place so that we never really
had time to, well, to relax or anything else because we were constantly on the go getting these things set up.
And an evacuation hospital is the first place they go after a first aid.
I see, after first aid.
Yeah, and what you do for triage, you put people back in combat before you take care of the seriously ill ones.
And the ones that are very serious, you hopefully with
IVs and so forth that you could keep them going until they could get into surgery.
As a triage nurse this was rather overwhelming responsibility to make these decisions.
It was.
I mean another doctor and I made these decisions but we had to carry them out and it was very overwhelming.
After doing it for about four or five months I asked to be transferred to a surgical ward and let somebody else take over that responsibility.
Indeed.
And for some 18 months, you pretty much followed Patton's army.
Yes.
Through different countries and eventually to Germany.
Yeah, we were, I think the longest away from the armies was four or five miles, longest.
Right.
And when it came to the Battle of the Bulge, we were less than a mile.
From where the Bulge was being fought.
Yes.
I think now might be a good time to go to some photographs that the Kozlowski's have kept throughout their time.
And we've got about four or five photographs that I would like to go to now.
And I believe that the first one, Mr. Kozlowski, I believe is, tell us what we're looking at there.
I believe that's you on the left.
Yes, well we were in the doorway of the C-47.
This is the plane that we dropped the paratroopers with and brought the wounded back and carried all supplies and everything into the war zone.
And I flew about 42 missions in the C-47 and 42 with the bombers.
Okay, let's go on to the next photograph now.
That's a souvenir of war, and that is you holding it.
Well, I was holding a Nazi flag and a German helmet and so forth.
And it's funny, I guess it isn't funny, but I called it a Nazi flag, and that is what the Germans call it now.
They don't not call it the German flag.
Let's move on to the next photograph, and I think this is, Yolanda, this is from your part of the war.
This was treating a minor injury, but we did wherever we could, and most of the minor injuries we did as they came in, because all our supplies were there.
You can't see them, but they were there, and we were taking care of the minor injury.
right-hand picture the large picture that's you on the on the left yes of that with other medical personnel right and and uh and soldiers evidently that you were treating then yeah and then on the uh on the left are four nurses none of those are you but those are uh some of uh friends of mine some friends of yours outside of one of the tents that was there were where you lived yeah there were four nurses assigned to each tent and the four nurses that i lived with i'm the only one that's a survivor i see
Move on to the next picture.
This was the evacuation hospital.
That's how they set it up, yes.
It was not a small operation.
An evacuation hospital was a large, like a station hospital in England, where there were a lot of people.
We had radiology, we had dental work, we had surgery.
I mean, a lot of things happened there.
All under a tent.
All under tents.
And the final picture is there you all are, those young Ed and Yolanda Kozlowski.
And I guess those were just your formal military photographs, is that right?
That's right, yeah.
That's what we sent back home.
Indeed.
Yolanda, I want to talk to you.
You said that there were times that you went on leave and you found your way in Paris, and you were able to meet some very interesting people when you were there, journalists who were covering the war.
Just about every journalist that was in the European theater, you had the opportunity to meet.
Is that right?
That is right.
That was because I met a Francis Chase, who was a journalist for the New Yorker.
And with his introduction to all these journalists, it was a very good thing to meet all these people that were writing about the war.
I didn't agree about that.
I also met Ernest Hemingway through him, and he and Francis Chase had fought in the Spanish War together.
And I do not have good memories of Hemingway.
I thought he was very uncouth, and I think that he was only concerned with himself.
So there you go.
Mr. Chase gave you something and we're going to that shot right now, which allows me to hold this up.
This is a silk map.
You tell us about it.
What is this?
It's a silk map and where the blue line is drawn is where the
United States forces were at that time.
They weren't any further than that.
So as you can see we were very close to the coastline and we had not gone in.
There was still a lot of German fighting and this was given to people so that if they got lost they sort of could find their way because they had taken away all the signs of the towns that were around there.
You went in through a town and you didn't know what town you were in.
It's hard to tell on the television, but as I'm holding it, this is just like a silk scarf.
It's made of the same material.
And the reason they did this was so that if it got wet, it would dry it out.
That's right.
Cotton did not stand underneath the wear and tear, and that's the reason they did it.
And these are very rare things.
Yes, they are.
Amazing.
There weren't too many of them.
There weren't too many, and there's still not many around, but you obviously treasure this one.
Yes, I do.
Right.
Captain Kozlowski, after your service was over, there's so many much more to talk about, both your service, but we're limited in time.
You were educated in Wisconsin at Marquette, at Ohio State University eventually.
And eventually you became a part of NASA and quite an instrumental part of NASA.
Talk about what you did for the Space Administration.
Well, actually, I started to work for NASA at the Cleveland Wind Tunnel.
And I had quite a bit of experience when I worked for a steel mill with the ceramics that were used in the furnaces and so forth.
And so I talked about that a little bit, and suddenly I found myself working with ceramics for the heat shield on the bottom of the Apollo missions.
of the Apollo vessels and my job was to try to design one that would withstand the temperatures coming back from the trips and that's what brought me to Texas.
The Apollo's did not have any problem with the heat shield itself.
The previous vessel, the Mercury's, did almost burn through twice.
So that's why they're particularly interested in that.
Now, in Apollo 13, I was in the control room when Lebel got on the radio and he radioed back.
He says, Houston, we have a problem.
But the way he said it and the sound of his voice, everybody knew it was something more than a little problem.
It kind of galvanized the whole...
whole area, whole control room into action.
And the movie represented it very well.
There was no bi-play in there at all that I could see, that I could remember.
They didn't Hollywood it up a lot.
It was pretty much true to form.
It was pretty straightforward kind of thing.
Indeed.
And it's very difficult to imagine you had as many as six men, well, four in the lamb, as they called it, the vessel that was supposed to land on the moon.
And it didn't...
Well, they were very, very crowded.
One of them, of course, was sick, was a little ill.
And when they finally got back, it was a joy to us and joy to them, I'm sure.
All right.
Y'all have been married for 58 years now, so obviously this is an event in his professional life that you remember very well also.
Oh, yes.
It was a stressful time, but a successful time at the same time.
And I'm going to put a little bit in here that my husband also devised a system where they could retrieve bullets that were fired from guns.
He suggested that they fire them into water, and if they fired them into water, the shells fell down into a canister.
Well, this is when I worked for a company called TRW.
And one of their products was to make the M1 rifle.
And the problem was, how do you test them?
And they made millions of these, and of course, the amount of lead they used was tremendous.
Pretty amazing.
And so what we did, we had them shoot into a tank of water.
And the opening in the tank was on the side, and not on the top and then the side, and the water would be flying.
It's a fascinating story, but I'm sorry that we're out of time.
And I apologize.
Thank you very much for being here.
It's an amazing story.
They served in different European arenas, but somehow knew that they would get together.
and we thank the Kozlowskis for their service, as we thank all veterans.
Please join us next time.
I'm Tom Turbiville, and this is Veterans of the Valley.
We thank you.